Building an API pt. 2 - lesson 2: "Error Handling" updates (#151)
Ada-Developers-Academy/core-unit-2: api-2-read-404s/400-and-404s.md

# Error Handling

<!-- FLASK UPDATE -->
<!--
<iframe src="https://adaacademy.hosted.panopto.com/Panopto/Pages/Embed.aspx?pid=2fdeb749-36d1-43a2-9b9d-ae670124405e&autoplay=false&offerviewer=true&showtitle=true&showbrand=true&captions=true&interactivity=all" height="405" width="720" style="border: 1px solid #464646;" allowfullscreen allow="autoplay"></iframe>
-->

## Goals

Our goal for this lesson is to learn how to handle errors for the `GET`&nbsp;`/books/<book_id>` route.

In this lesson we will extend our Hello Books API to handle the following error cases for the RESTful route `GET` `/books/<book_id>`:

> 1. If no `book` record matches the `book_id`, the server will return a `404` response code with a message indicating that there are no `book`s with `book_id`.

Author: Maybe? Is it the class? Is it the table name (we're talking about records)? Is it just formatting to make it stand out? Who can say. But if you interpretted it as the class name, I'm happy to capitalize it. 😁

            }
```

> There is a single explicit `return` in this function, but we only reach it if the condition `book.id == book_id` is `True`. That is, we need to find a book with a matching ID in order for the `return` to execute. If we never find a book with a matching ID, the loop will complete without returning anything. As we know, in Python, a function that completes without an explicit `return` statement behaves like it returned `None`.

Author: Hmm. Looking at the disassembly for a function with no return
```
def no_ret():
  pass
```

produces
```
>>> dis(no_ret)
  1           0 RESUME                   0

  2           2 RETURN_CONST             0 (None)
```

Python literally added a `RETURN_CONST (None)` opcode to the end. I wasn't sure whether that was the case, or whether it was language shenanigans that took care of dealing with the `None`. So how about:

```suggestion
There is a single explicit `return` in this function, but we only reach it if the condition `book.id == book_id` is `True`. That is, we need to find a book with a matching ID in order for the `return` to execute. If we never find a book with a matching ID, the loop will complete without returning anything, eventually reaching the end of the function.

As we know, in Python, a function that completes without an explicit `return` statement still returns `None` behind the scenes. This behavior is what Flask is seeing, which triggers the error message.
```

### Handling a non-existing book: Preparation

To handle this scenario, we should return a response with a response body indicating that the book with `book_id` was not found and a `404` response code, which is the standard code to indicate that a resource was not found.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
| Endpoint Detail | Notes |
| ------- | ------- |
| Request | `GET /books/100` |
| Response Status | `404 Not Found` |
| Response Body | `{"message" : "book 100 not found"}` |

> <!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

Author: I "rotated" the table to avoid the narrow columns wrapping the values unnecessarily, following our Pieces of Code/Notes pattern. I think this works pretty well (open to different column header names), and is probably worth considering elsewhere in the curriculum if we have single row tables with more than 2 columns.

### Handling a non-existing book: Code

When we return a dictionary value to be converted to JSON, Flask will automatically set the response code to `200`. Flask provides a few ways to set a different response code. For basic cases, Flask lets us return a tuple containing a response body dictionary and a response code.

So to return a `404` response if the loop completes without returning, we can add a `return` statement after the loop like this:

```python

>     return {"message":f"book {book_id} not found"}, 404

Author: I agree. I didn't look closely enough at the live branch to notice that was fixed!

>     return {"message":f"book {book_id} not found"}, 404

Author: Fixed offline en masse

>     return {"message":f"book {book_id} not found"}, 404

Author: Fixed offline en masse.

```

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
| Piece of Code | Notes |
| ------------- | ----- |
| `return ..., ...` | The comma means that this is returning a `tuple` of two values. Remember that it's not parentheses that make a `tuple` literal, but rather a comma. |
| `{"message":`&ZeroWidthSpace;`f"book {book_id} not found"}` | The first value in the `tuple`, `{"message":f"book {book_id} not found"}`, is the dictionary that will become the `JSON` response body. |
| `404` | The second value in the `tuple`, `404`, is the response code. |

> <!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

Author: Sadly, the default VS Code markdown formatter tries to pad out tables. Useful if producing markdown files that one actually intends others to consume in raw format. Not so useful for us. I had to switch my formatter specifically back to prettier and then use the ignore comments in order to still be able to auto format without getting monster tables.

<br />

It's a common pattern for libraries to run some piece of code that we provide. If our code doesn't meet the library's expectations, the library will raise an error. The error will be raised in the library's code, but the issue is in our code. Flask did a good job of trying to point us to the actual cause through its error message, but this isn't always the case with all libraries.

<br />

So when debugging an error, the Traceback can be a helpful guide, but it's not always the final word on where the issue is. If the error is reported in library code, it's more likely that there is an issue with our own code, and we'll need to try to figure out what code in our project is related to the issue, and then look through that code to find the problem.

</details>

### !end-callout

### Handling an invalid `book_id`: Preparation

> To handle this scenario, we should return a response with a response body indicating that the book with `book_id` is invalid and a `400` response code.

Author: The code's meaning is covered previously in Intro to API Design > Designing Responses, so I'm not too concerned about the gap here between showing the number, and providing a reminder of the meaning, as the reader has at least a little prior context.

With that in mind, would you prefer to include the label with the number for general readability?

> To handle this scenario, we should return a response with a response body indicating that the book with `book_id` is invalid and a `400` response code.

Reviewer: That sounds good on discussion of meaning. I would prefer to include the label the first time we bring them up just as a reminder.

> To handle this scenario, we should return a response with a response body indicating that the book with `book_id` is invalid and a `400` response code.

Author: Included the description when shown early on in the Goals, as well as the first time each appears in situ

    return {"message":f"book {book_id} invalid"}, 400
```

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
| Piece of Code | Notes |
| ------------- | ----- |
| `try:`<br />&emsp;&emsp;`...`<br />`except:`<br />&emsp;&emsp;`...` | Run the code in the `try` block, jumping to the `except` block if an `Error` occurs |
| `book_id = int(book_id)` | For valid values of `book_id`, this code will convert the `book_id` to an `int`. `book_id` is initially a string since it it a route parameter. If `book_id` cannot be interpreted as an `int`, then `int()` raises a `ValueError` |
| `return {"message":`&ZeroWidthSpace;`f"book {book_id} invalid"}, 400` | Runs when the `int()` call fails, by raising a `ValueError`. This code results in a `JSON` response body with the `message`, and a status code of `400` (Bad Request). As before, we return a `tuple` whose first value is a dictionary that Flask will convert to the `JSON` response body, and whose second is the response status code. |

> <!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

Author: I had considered switching to a table and using a code snippet, but that would look markedly different from the other code breakdowns we do. So instead I went with splitting things up into the shorter sections you see.

```python
    try:
        book_id = int(book_id)
    except ValueError:
        return {"message": f"book {book_id} invalid"}, 400
```

<br />

If some other truly unexpected error were to occur in our `try` block, it would not be caught by this `except` block. As a result, it would continue to propagate up the call stack, potentially causing a crash. While this may sound extreme, it's usually better for code to crash than to continue running in an unknown state. Here, we only know how to fix a `ValueError`, so really, we should only catch that error.

### !end-callout

Let's verify that we now receive the correct response body and code for an invalid `book_id`. We can do this by making the request in our browser and viewing the server logs.

<br>

![400 Browser Response](../assets/api-2-read-error/400-response.png)  
*Fig. Invalid ID message returned in response to a request for a book with a non-numeric ID.*

![400 Server Log](../assets/api-2-read-error/400-server-log.png)  
*Fig. Server log showing that the request for an invalid book ID results in a 400 status.*

> ## Refactor with Helper function

Reviewer: Reading it again, this title feels a little weird. How about something like:

```suggestion
## Refactor with a Helper Function
```
or
```suggestion
## Refactor Error Handling to a Helper Function
```

Our `GET` `/books/<book_id>` endpoint now correctly handles `404` and `400` level responses. We may notice that our `get_one_book(book_id)` route function is getting a bit long. The more code we add, the less clear it becomes that this route is really just trying to find a single book and return its details.

Wouldn't it be great if we had a separate function that could find a single book with all the error handling taken care of? Then our route function could just call that function and return the formatted book details. In later lessons, we'll also see that placing this logic in a separate function will make it easier to test. It may even become the basis for a more general function that can be used in other parts of our code, which would be more difficult to do if the logic remained "trapped" in our route, if we even notice the opportunity at all.

While such a function doesn't exist in our project yet, we're coders! We can make it happen!

### !callout-info

## Set Aside Practice Time to Look for Refactors

> We shouldn't worry if we don't see the need for a helper function right away. It's a skill that comes with experience. As we write more code, we'll get a feeling for more patterns that can be extracted into separate functions. While splitting up our logic might make a project feel more complex at first, it will make it easier to maintain and extend as the project grows.

Reviewer: Not required, but suggesting some tweaks to remove or reword sentiments that are very close between the 1st & 3rd paragraph. Github was being weird about me selecting all the paragraphs to submit one suggestion so it's split up, sorry 😅

```suggestion
We shouldn't worry if we don't see the need for a helper function right away. As we write more code, we'll get a feeling for which patterns can be extracted into separate functions. While splitting up our logic might make a project feel more complex at first, it will make it easier to maintain and extend as the project grows.
```

<br />

While we are electing to perform this refactor now, it's often more common to wait until we have a few more instances of similar code before extracting it into a helper function. This way, we can be more confident that the function we're creating is general enough to be useful in multiple places. This can also apply to other types of refactors, such as creating base classes for inheritance.

<br />

> The more experience we gain, the better we'll become at recognizing refactors that are likely to be helpful even before we have multiple instances of similar code. This is a skill that comes with time and practice, so don't worry if it doesn't come naturally at first. To help us develop this skill, it can be beneficial to set aside specific time to review our code and actively look for repetition that might be a hint that a refactor is needed. We'll see further refactoring examples in later lessons.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The more experience we gain, the better we'll become at recognizing refactors that are likely to be helpful, even before we have multiple instances of similar code. To help us develop this skill, it can be beneficial to set aside specific time to review our code and actively look for repetition that might be a hint that a refactor is needed. We'll see further refactoring examples in later lessons.
```

| `abort(make_response(`&ZeroWidthSpace;`response, 404))` | If the loop completes without returning, the book ID was not found. `abort`, and return a `404` response. |
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

## Working with Flask `Response`s

> `Response` is a Flask class that represents HTTP responses. Ultimately, anything Flask sends back to a client gets represented as an instance of `Response`. Most of the time, we won't need to work with a `Response` directly, since Flask also allows us to return other values from routes, such as `dict`s and `list`s, and Flask takes care of using them to build a `Response`. But in specific cases, such as our call to `abort` above, we need an actual `Response` instance. One way of doing this is to instantiate a `Response` directly using its constructor.
> 
> Flask also provides the helper method `make_response`, which is a little bit more flexible in the arguments it can accept than if we used the `Response` constructor ourselves, so we'll be using `make_response` instead. But we should be aware that it's still creating a `Response` instance internally. We can think of `make_response` as sort of a convenience constructor for `Response`.
> 
> For more information about the `Response` class we can refer to the following reference documents.
> 
> - [Flask's definition of `Response`](https://flask.palletsprojects.com/en/3.0.x/api/#response-objects)
> - [Flask's quickstart guide on creating responses](https://flask.palletsprojects.com/en/3.0.x/quickstart/#about-responses), which notably does _not_ feature the `Response` class
> 
> There are a variety of ways to create `Response` instances in Flask, some implicit and some explicit. The previous resource links will provide a good starting point for exploring further!

Reviewer: Not required, but some slight revisions that might make this section a little more concise:

```suggestion
`Response` is a Flask class that represents HTTP responses. Ultimately, anything Flask sends back to a client gets represented as an instance of `Response`. Most of the time, we won't need to work with a `Response` directly. Flask allows us to return other values from routes, such as `dict`s and `list`s, and Flask takes care of using them to build a `Response`. But in specific cases, such as our call to `abort` above, we need an actual `Response` instance! 

One way of creating a `Response` object is to instantiate a `Response` directly using its constructor. Flask also provides the helper method `make_response`, which is a little bit more flexible in the arguments it can accept than the `Response` constructor. We'll be using `make_response` instead generating our own `Response` object, but we should be aware that Flask is still creating a `Response` instance internally. We can think of `make_response` as sort of a convenience constructor for `Response`.

There are a variety of ways to create `Response` instances in Flask, some implicit and some explicit. The resource links below will provide a good starting point for exploring further! 

- [Flask's definition of `Response`](https://flask.palletsprojects.com/en/3.0.x/api/#response-objects)
- [Flask's quickstart guide on creating responses](https://flask.palletsprojects.com/en/3.0.x/quickstart/#about-responses), which notably does _not_ feature the `Response` class
```

Author: From your edits, I did a bit more consolidation. I tried to make it sound a little less like we'll _never_ use the constructor, since we do end up using it for the empty body responses later on.
```suggestion
`Response` is a Flask class that represents HTTP responses. Ultimately, anything Flask sends back to a client gets represented as an instance of `Response`. Most of the time, we won't need to work with a `Response` directly. Flask allows us to return other values from routes, such as `dict`s and `list`s, and Flask takes care of using them to build a `Response`. But in specific cases, such as our call to `abort` above, we need an actual `Response` instance! 

While it's possible to create a `Response` object directly using its constructor, Flask also provides the helper method `make_response`, which is a little bit more flexible than the constructor in the arguments it can accept. So here, we're using `make_response`, but we should be aware that Flask is still creating a `Response` instance internally. We can think of `make_response` as sort of a convenience constructor for `Response`.

There are a variety of ways to create `Response` instances in Flask, some implicit and some explicit. The resource links below will provide a good starting point for exploring further! 

- [Flask's definition of `Response`](https://flask.palletsprojects.com/en/3.0.x/api/#response-objects)
- [Flask's quickstart guide on creating responses](https://flask.palletsprojects.com/en/3.0.x/quickstart/#about-responses), which notably does _not_ feature the `Response` class
```
